---
layout: post
title:  "Treasure and XP Pt 1: Introduction"
date:   2016-01-13 10:00:00 -0600
categories: dm guides lectures multipart
tags: treasure xp dm lecture dm101
---

In this series, we'll explore the role of Treasure and Experience in Dungeons and Dragons beginning with a brief article on how they've changed in 5th edition and the purpose of each while in future articles we'll discuss how to maximize the utility of each, and how to motivate those characters who are otherwise disinterested in monetary rewards.

The 5th edition of Dungeons and Dragons makes several important changes to both Experience Points and Treasure, the two traditional rewards given out to player characters. Experience points can now be (and are encouraged to be) handed out as a reward outside of direct combat such as for infiltrating an enemy camp or successfully interrogating an NPC. Treasure meanwhile has been significantly limited in it's usefulness since under default settings magical items can not be purchased and the only sink for treasure is buying property or luxuries, both which make minor differences for the players.

Under 3.5, experience was typically handed out only when the players successfully defeated something. That might be a kobold guarding an entrance, a big boss at the end of the dungeon, or the poor village blacksmith who is trying to give a quest to the PCs. Regardless of whether or not an NPC is meaningful to the story or the quest, killing it will net some experience points. Thus those players with a desire to level quickly will find an optimal strategy of simply murdering everything they can get near while keeping their lifestyles to an absolute minimum; the so-called 'murder-hobo' strategy.

In 5th edition it's encouraged (and in the default modules even spelled out) to give players XP not simply for murdering things but also to reward them for successfully completing objectives. In the official modules, XP is often handed out for asking the right questions or solving the main objective with a clever plan instead of a sword. Likewise DM's are encouraged to give out XP when PCs use persuasion to convince enemies to walk away from a battle, or when the players manage to steal a useful map instead of beheading it's owner.

This in itself is fine and good and makes experience points more useful, but from a PC perspective the reward of XP is invisible until after they've successfully completed the action. Furthermore, it's not visible to the PCs which actions will actually reward XP and therefore it's almost always still in their convenience to simply murder every bartender, blacksmith and wandering merchant who may cross their paths, as murder-hoboing will almost always net as much if not much more than risky strategies and daring plans.

These leads us to the other potential carrot in the DMs pocket: treasure. Unlike experience points, treasure is very visible: the evil cultist with the solid gold crown, or the crooked noble whose halls are filled with expensive art. Suddenly it becomes in the interest of the PCs - or at least those players with a reason to desire wealth - to think cleverly and carefully pilfer and pry instead of painting the maps red with blood. Likewise, NPCs offering rewards are an easy way to direct the PCs towards objectives and to convince them to spare your towns.

The issue in 5th edition is that treasure by default is quite useless past a rather small amount. It takes at most a few hundred gold pieces to keep a small group well stocked for ages, and past that the gold has very little use. Magical items are no longer easily for sale which were the primary mechanism in previous versions of using wealth to make a character stronger. Instead the primary sinks for treasure are property and extravagant lifestyles, which while interesting in role play serve no functional purpose to a PC in the midst of a dungeon.

In the next article, we'll explore how to use treasure to encourage players more directly, and also how to use treasure to indicate likely XP rewards to your players.
